# [CPP2060] Shame

Module: Professionalism

# Importance

- Guilt is primarily focused on regret for performing bad action (but is unlikely to lead to personal judgement) → ‘I made a mistake’ (object centred)
- Shame is focused on the self, suggesting that an error in yourself leads to incorrect actions (Self-centred regret) → ‘I am the mistake’
- Shame is linked to many unhealthy behaviours.
- Shame is a risk factor for suicide.
- Healthcare professionals frequently, inadvertently add to burden of shame.
- Shame stops patients from engaging with care.
- Shame stops professionals from recognising and seeking help for their own health needs.
- Toxic Shame = Chronic Shame that commonly arises in early childhood, often associated with other mental illnesses reflecting low self-image
- This can commonly occur via rationalisation/internalisation of negative views on oneself where children are unable to speak to others about their emotions
- Acute Shame = Short term shame that usually is self-resolving and not associated with childhood events

---

# Causes

- Age: frailty, memory loss, impaired hearing, sight, mobility.
- Bad habits: smoking, drinking, comfort eating, addiction, not taking medication.
- Being a burden on others/to NHS.
- Bodies: obesity, skin diseases, incontinence, disfigurement.
- Violence and abuse: as victim or perpetrator.
- Gender identity, sexuality.
- Mental illnesses: depression, anxiety.
- Poverty: not being able to afford to work, dress, eat, travel, participate like others, being on benefits.
- Sexually transmitted infections.

---

# Presentations

- Chronic pain
- Addiction
- Eating disorders
- Severe obesity
- Self-harm
- Suicide
- Addiction
- Mental health disorders: especially chronic anxiety, chronic depression, OCD, PTSD, bipolar and personality disorders.
- Professional burnout

---

# Impact on Health

- ↑ risk of:
- Many types of disease.
- Mental ill-health.
- Addiction and other harmful behaviour.
- Imprisonment
- Difficulty engaging with care.
- Dependency

---

# Trauma World

- Embodied fear and perception of world as a dangerous place.
- Propensity to disconnect, from aspects of ourselves.
- Identity becomes rooted in shame, about our needs, what has happened and how we behave.

---

# Loneliness

- When people feel that others around them are threats rather than sources of cooperation and compassion, they feel lonely

---

# Types of Empathy

1. Affective empathy: being moved emotionally by other people’s emotional states.
2. Cognitive empathy: understanding at an intellectual level how another person thinks and feels (about what they’re going through).
3. Compassionate empathy: being motivated to take action in
response to affective and cognitive empathy.

---

# Recognising and Responding To Shame

### Recognising Shame

- Behaviour:
- Rooted in fear, dissociation and shame.
- Anxiety, eating disorders, addiction, chaos, sabotage.
- Risk factors:
- Trauma
- Stigma

### Responding To Shame

- Recognition
- Non-judgement
- Empathy: ability to understand and share feelings of another.
- Empathy does not demand that we like them, but does require us to try to understand them, what has
happened, what they did, and why.

---

# Doctor’s Shame

- Formative experiences
- Overly critical parenting.
- Experiences of care and caring.
- Anxiety and other mental health problems.
- Other long-term conditions.
- Poverty/culture
- Pressure of work, humiliation, lack of support.

---

# Conclusions

- Recognise links between trauma and shame.
- Understand how shame, fear and disconnection affect behaviour.
- Protect and promote continuity of care and professional relationships.

---