# [025] Case Study - Calcium

Progress: Not started

# Calcium Storage

### Bone

- 99% of Human Calcium is stored in bone, mainly as Hydroxyapatite (99%) but also as Simple Calcium Phosphate salts that is rapidly accessible to increase Plasma Calcium
- In chronic illnesses, hydroxyapatite can be accessed and much more Ca can be lost from bone

### Cell

- Mainly found bound to Ca-Binding Proteins like Calmodulin (Involved in Smooth Muscle Excitation-Contraction Coupling) and Calsequestrin (Found in Skeletal Muscle SR)
- Free Cytosolic [Calcium] is low and rises substantially when Calcium Activated Pathways are stimulated

### Plasma

- 50% is Ionised, 40% is bound to proteins and 10% is complexes with anions like Phosphate, Bicarbonate and Citrate

---

# Calcium Intake and Excretion

- Average Dietary Intake = 25 mmol
- 18 mmol of calcium is added to the GI Tract through GI secretions → 43 mmol added to the GI tract each day.
- 20 mmol of Calcium in the GI Tract is absorbed from the small intestine, giving a net absorption of 5 mmol, leaving 13 mmol in faeces.
- The absorbed calcium enters the blood and is distributed through the extracellular fluid (ECF).
- The ECF exchanges 8 mmol/day with bone calcium but the exact number of mmol exchanged between cells is not accurately determined.
- In a steady state, the net quantity absorbed from the GI tract (5 mmol) must equal the quantity excreted in the urine.
- We filter around 250 mmol of calcium each day but only 5 mmol is excreted in the urine. The other 245 mmol is reabsorbed by the tubules.

### Dietary Calcium

- Calcium in dairy products and eggs is well absorbed.
- But calcium in vegetables is often complexed to organic acids, such as oxalates and citrates.
- Also, calcium binds to long–chain fatty acids.
- Complexing and binding hinder calcium absorption.

---

# Calcium Handling in GI Tract and Kidneys

### GI Tract

1. Transcellular
- Calcium ions enters the epithelial cells from the intestinal lumen through TRPM7
- As the Calcium enters the cells, it is immediately bound to calbindin, a vitamin D–dependent Calcium–binding protein.
- It remains bound until it is extruded across the basolateral membrane by a Calcium–ATPase.
1. Paracellular 
- Calcium diffuses through Claudins in Tight Junctions down its electrochemical gradient
- In the cells, cytosolic Calcium concentration is maintained in the nmolar range (~100 nmoles/L).
- Concentrations above these activate a variety of signaling pathways and will also lead to cell damage if excessive.
- Therefore, by preventing the ionized Calcium concentration from rising, calbindin protects cells from untoward effects of the ion.

### Kidneys

- Some 65% of the filtered Ca is reabsorbed passively through the  paracellular pathway in the proximal tubules via Claudin-2.
- Similarly, some 25% of the filtered Calcium is reabsorbed passively through the paracellular pathway in the ascending thick limb of the loop of Henle.
- Only some 8% of the filtered Ca is reabsorbed actively.
    
    This occurs in the distal tubules and involves the same pathways as are used for Ca absorption in the intestine.
    
- Around 2% of the filtered load is excreted in the urine.

---

# Calcium Functions

1. Intracellular messenger (E.g Gq Signalling, Neurotransmission and EC Coupling)
2. Increased Ca concentration has the opposite effect, decreasing membrane excitability.
3. Alters membrane channel activity. For example, voltage–gated Na channels leak Na ions when plasma ionized Ca concentration is decreased, making the membrane hyper–excitable
4. It binds to proteins, thus altering their tertiary structure and their activity. For example, some of the clotting factors are activated by Ca binding.
5. It has a major structural role as the mineral, calcium hydroxyapatite in bone.
6. trengthens the enamel layer in teeth.

---

# Phosphate Content

### Body Phosphorous Content

- Adult has around 23 mol of Phosphorous, with 85% of this being in bone
- In Bone, 99% of Phosphate is found as Hydroxyapatite, with the remaining 1% being readily exchangeable (Bone Phosphorous can only be liberated in chronic illness due to Bone Resportion)
- Non-Bone P is mainly found in cells  (only 0.1% is in the ECF) where it is the main anion

### Plasma Phosphate

- 10% Protein Bound, 35% complexes with Na, Ca and Mg and 55% Inorganic Phosphate

### ECF Phosphate

- There is both H₂PO₄²⁻ and HPO₄⁻ found in blood, with the ratio of these determined by pH
- At normal pH H₂PO₄²⁻:HPO₄⁻ = 1:4 as the pKa for the reaction H₂PO₄²⁻ + H⁺ ⇄ HPO₄⁻

### In Cells

- Inorganic phosphate (Pi) makes up 16% of the total. It is largely there as HPO₄⁻, given that cellular pH ~ 7.2.
- Phosphocreatine, an energy store for the muscle contributes 70% of the total. This would not be true for other cell–types that do not store energy in this form.
- High energy triphosphates (ATP, GTP) and their diphosphates (ADP, GDP) make up 8% of the total.
- Hexose phosphate (Glucose–6P) makes up 6% of the total

---

# Phosphorous Balance and Absorption

### Balance

- Average Daily Intake = 40 mmol
- 5 mmol of P are added to GI Contents via Secretions, causing 45 mmol of P to be present in the GI Tract
- 31 mmol is absorbed from the GI Contents across the SI to produce net 26 mmol absorption and 14 mmol excretion
- ECF exchanges around 10 mmol/day with bone phosphorous but the exact number exchanged between cells is unknown
- Steady State → Net Absorption = Excretion.
- Kidneys filter 180 mmol/day but only 26 mmol is excreted, with the remaining 154 mmol being reabsorbed

### Absorption

- Phosphorus–containing foods are readily digested and the phosphorus absorbed.
- Most of the phosphorus excreted in the faeces is associated with unreabsorbed calcium.
1. Paracellular 
- P diffuses through non-specific ion chanels in Tight junctions
1. Transcellular
- P is contransported into the cell alongside Na
- It leaves cells on a phosphate carrier (details of this carrier are unknown)
- Na that influxed with P is pumped across the Basolateral Membrane via the Na⁺/K⁺
- K⁺ that is influxed into the Cell via the Na⁺/K⁺ ATPase diffuses across the basolateral membrane via K⁺ Channels

### Renal Handling

- Virtually all of the reabsorption of the filtered phosphate occurs in the proximal tubule.
- Mechanisms are similar to those for phosphate absorption in the intestine.

---

# Functions of Phosphorous

- All nucleotides contain a phosphate group which is an essential component.
- Normally, the major urinary buffer pair is H₂PO₄²⁻/HPO₄⁻. This pairing also contributes to cell and ECF buffering though there are more important buffers in cells and ECF.
- Cell membranes consists of a phospholipid bilayer with the hydrophobic tails in apposition and the hydrophilic heads in contact with the fluid in the cell interior and on the outside of the cell. Thus the phosphate contributes to membrane stability.
- The cell energy 'currency' is largely ATP, a triphosphate.
- Phosphorylation of proteins result in enzyme activation and is a major component of cellular signaling.
- Phosphorus has a major structural role in bone where it reacts with calcium to give the mineral, calcium hydroxyapatite

---

# PTH

- The PTH gene encodes a longer prepro-hormone , which is cleaved twice (at the N-terminus) to generate active PTH.
- The secretion of the PTH protein requires magnesium, deficiency of which can impair PTH secretion in premature babies, resulting in hypocalcaemia.
- Of the amino-acids present in PTH, only those 34 residues at the N-terminus are required for full biological activity.
- The full-length PTH protein has a plasma half-life of 5 minutes or so, and so must be constantly secreted to maintain the serum calcium concentration.
- When Plasma Calcium levels drop, PTH:
1. Stimulates RANK-L Expression on OBs, atcivating OCs to release Calcium from bone into the blood
2. Increases Distal Nephron Calcium Reabsorption
3. Increases [Active Vit D], which increases intestinal calcium absorption
- Solubility Product of Calcium Phosphate Salts = [Calcium] x [Phosphate]
- PTH also stimulates Phosphate Excretion to counteract PTH-Dependent Hyperphosphataemia produced by Bone Resorption. This prevents [Phosphate] from rising to levels that exceed the Calcium Phosphate Solubility product, causing Calcium Phosphate depositions to occur within Vessels and Viscera

---

# Vitamin D and Its Metabolsm

### Vitamin D

- Sourced from Diet or Skin Synthesis
- Vitamin D refers to a group of related steroid–based compounds in which one of the bonds in the steroid ring is broken.
- Vitamin D2 or D3 are not physiologically active

### Metabolism

- 7-Dehydrocholesterol is synthesised in the Straum Basale of the Skin which can be either converted to Cholesterol of Vitamin D3 (Cholecalciferol) via UV-B
- As Vitamin D3 is lipid soluble, it is carrier in blood by Vitamin D-Binding Protein/VDBP
- In the Liver, Vitamin D3 is hydroxylated to 25–hydroxycholecalciferol by 25–hydroxylase. This is the most abundant of the circulating vitamin D metabolites.
- In the kidneys, the 25–hydroxycholecalciferol is hydroxylated again to give either the active metabolite 1,25–dihydroxycholecalciferol or the inactive metabolite 24,25–dihydroxycholecalciferol that is excreted.
- Synthesis of 1,25–hydroxycholecalciferol is stimulated by PTH, so is increased when plasma ionized Calcium is low and PTH secretion is stimulated.
- Both 25–hydroxycholecalciferol and 1,25–dihydroxycholecalciferol are carried in the plasma bound to VDBP.
- 1,25–dihydroxycholecalciferol is metabolized to 1,24,25 trihydroxycholecalciferol, an inactive compound that is excreted largely through the biliary system.
- Being fat–soluble, 1,25–hydroxycholecalciferol diffuses into cells where it binds to a vitamin D receptor that functions as a transcription factor modulating gene expression

### Metabolic Regulation

- The liver production of 25–hydroxycholecalciferol from cholecalciferol is tightly controlled through negative feedback. Increasing concentrations of 25–hydroxycholecalciferol inhibit further conversion.
- This has 2 advantages:
1. The liver can store cholecalciferol for months but the half–life of 25–hydroxycholecalciferol is much shorter, so limiting conversion helps maintain the liver's cholecalciferol stores.
2. The intake and production of cholecalciferol can vary widely without this affecting the production of 25–hydroxycholecalciferol.
- Although the renal production of 1,25–dihydroxycholecalciferol is affected by Calcium (increasing ionized Calcium decreasing 1,25–dihydroxycholecalciferol production), the major control is exerted by PTH.
- PTH stimulates the enzymatic conversion of 25–hydroxycholecalciferol to 1,25–dihydroxycholecalciferol. Since PTH secretion is stimulated when plasma ionized Ca is low, this facilitates an increase in ionized Ca.
- The major effect of 1,25–dihydroxycholecalciferol is on the absorption of calcium from the intestine.
- Another significant effect is to promote bone breakdown by osteoclasts. The release of ionized Ca into the blood contributes to maintenance of the plasma ionized Ca concentration when this is low.
- When ionized Ca concentration is normal or high, calcium phosphate is deposited on bone surfaces.
- In this situation, PTH levels are low and so the kidneys are not forming significant quantities of 1,25–dihydroxycholecalciferol.So there is not stimulus from 1,25–dihydroxycholecalciferol for osteoclastic bone breakdown.

---

# Calcium Dysbalance

- In Hypercalaemia, calcium-phosphate complexes may move down the ureter and hence, also be associated with blood in the urine (haematuria) and recurrent renal tract infections (pyelonephritis).
- Excessive production of PTH typically results from excessive secretion of PTH, most commonly due to a benign tumour of one or more of the parathyroid glands.
- This condition of primary hyperparathyroidism is characterised by hypercalcaemia accompanied by phosphaturia/hypophosphotaemia.
- Secondary hyperparathyroidism result from long-standing hypocalcaemia, due either to a defect in intestinal calcium uptake or low levels of calcitriol (e.g.due to chronic or end-stage renal failure).
- Tertiary hyperparathyroidism has been reported in renal transplant patients.
- **Hypercalcaemia** is a common feature of malignant disease.
- When malignant cells metastasise to bone, they secrete “osteoclast-activating factors” (such as prostaglandins and interleukins) that stimulate the resorption of bone, increasing the serum calcium concentration.
- In addition, a common feature of cancerous cells (including those that have not metastasised) is the synthesis of parathyroid hormone related peptide (PTHRP): a hypercalcaemic hormone with a structure similar to that of PTH.
- Vitamin D Excess can cause Hypercalcaemia
- Hypocalaemia is can lead to rickets in children and osteomalacia (bone pain, low bone density, pseudofractures and wide layers of poorly calcified osteoid) in adults

---

# Overall Calcium and Phosphae Balance

- The pH of the plasma affects the solubility constant of calcium and phosphate. Increasing pH increases it, decreasing pH decreases it.
- For calcium and phosphate, the normal plasma ion concentrations are such that the system is virtually saturated at normal values.
- However, the plasma does contain substances including pyrophosphates and citrate that inhibit calcium phosphate precipitation.
- Nevertheless, any increase in calcium or phosphate ion concentrations is likely to result in some calcium phosphate precipitation.
- And there is always a risk of calcification in tissues other than bone when calcium or phosphate concentrations rise.
- This is seen, for example, in chronic renal disease where there is loss of precise control over renal calcium and phosphate excretion and tissue calcification can become a problem.

### Hypocalaemia

- Hypocalcaemia does not always reflect defects in the endocrine axes controlling calcium homeostasis.
- For example, respiratory and/or metabolic alkalosis can decrease the concentration of ionic Ca2+ whereas acidosis raises this
- Within the plasma, the association between free Ca2+ ions and albumen is dependent on pH, and hence on:
1. gaseous exchange.
2. renal acid-base balance.

---

# Case Study

- Low Calcium, High PTH as Low Vit D means there is no feedback inhibition of PTH) → Vit D Deficiency
- Vit D is found in Liver, Some types of fish and egg yolk naturally but it can be added to other foods like Butter/Margarine
- Growing Children, Pregnant and Breastfeeding women need extra Vitamin D in order to facilitate growth here
- Hence, Vit D Deficiency is common in:
1. Pregnant or breastfeeding women. 
2. Breastfed babies whose mothers are lacking in vitamin D
3. Prolonged breastfeeding
4. People who get very little sunlight on their skin such as those who are stay indoors a lot, or cover up when outside, for example, if wearing a veil. 
5. People with conditions that affect the way the body handles vitamin D such as those with coeliac disease, Crohn’s disease, and some types of liver and kidney disease. 
6. People taking certain medicines: carbamezepine, phenytoin, primidone or barbiturates.
7. Px with dark skin/South Asia Origin, Elderly Px and those with FHx of Vitamin D Deficiency
- Around in 1 in 5 adults and kids have Vitamin D Deficiency
- This figure increases during the winter and spring, as reduced sunlight exposure causes reduced formation of Cholecalciferol
- For six months of the year (October to April), much of western Europe (including 90% of the UK) lies too far north to have enough UVB rays in sunlight necessary to make vitamin D in the skin.
- This means that many people in the
UK are at risk of not getting enough vitamin D unless they get it in their diet.

---